Anwar calls for review of natural disaster response policy

SUNGAI PETANI: Opposition leader Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim today urged the federal government to set up a commission to review and identify flaws in the existing natural disaster response policy.

Anwar stressed that the setting up of the commission was paramount to eliminate weaknesses in rescue missions following the devastating floods in several states recently.

"The core issue here is weakness in leadership (in managing disaster response), which resulted in frustrations among the flood victims.

"That is why I am calling for the setting up of a commission to review the existing policy, roles and action plan to avoid this (weakness) from recurring," he told reporters after opening Kedah PKR's general election machinery workshop at Pantai Merdeka, here.

Anwar, who is also PKR president said the failure of the Meteorological Department to issue disaster alert, compounded by the delayed response by the relevant authorities were unacceptable, since flood disasters were nothing new in this country.

"It took them up to two days (to respond) and even then the instructions given were rather vague.

"We totally understand why the people felt very disappointed with the government in regards to weaknesses in managing this disaster.

"The Defence Minister, the Prime Minister and other ministers should be held responsible," he said.

Anwar said that it was unfair to put the blame on the Armed Forces and the Fire and Rescue Department for the delays in rescuing the victims.

"Some quarters were pushing the blame on the Army, I don't agree because they were merely following orders (from the government).

"I remember back in 1995 when I chaired the disaster management council in my capacity as the deputy prime minister, we called for a meeting right after the flood disaster struck and immediately decided to mobilise the army.

"Just hours after a notice was issued, the army was already hitting the ground for rescue missions," he said.

On Tuesday, Prime Minister Datuk Seri Ismail Sabri Yaakob acknowledged weaknesses in flood management, especially in Selangor.

He assured that improvement would be made from time to time, stressing that it was not the responsibility of the federal government alone, but also the state governments and the frontliners at the districts.

Ismail Sabri said he would not defend anyone responsible behind the weaknesses, adding everyone involved must be held accountable.