 APHM thanks Health Ministry on offer to tackle medicine shortage

By Teoh Pei Ying - June 14, 2022 @ 4:41pm
APHM president Datuk Dr Kuljit Singh, commenting on reports of a shortage of specific medicines in private healthcare facilities, said the move indicates good cooperation between public and private healthcare bodies. - NSTP/MIKAIL ONG
APHM president Datuk Dr Kuljit Singh, commenting on reports of a shortage of specific medicines in private healthcare facilities, said the move indicates good cooperation between public and private healthcare bodies. - NSTP/MIKAIL ONG
KUALA LUMPUR: The Association of Private Hospitals (APHM) has lauded the Health Ministry's move to allow private medical centres to obtain medicines from government healthcare facilities should a shortage arise.

APHM president Datuk Dr Kuljit Singh, commenting on reports of a shortage of specific medicines in private healthcare facilities, said the move indicates good cooperation between public and private healthcare bodies.

"We thank the Health Ministry for the opportunity to seek help whenever there is a medicine shortage. Similarly, we can also provide medications when they (government hospitals) run short in the future. We have done that before," he told the New Straits Times.

He said the private hospitals are managing the supply shortage issue by using a mixture of original, generic and alternative medications.

MORE NEWS
Health Ministry urged to ensure no shortage of medicines in public hospitals
Private healthcare facilities can apply to borrow medicines
Pharmaniaga assures medicine supply chain will be maintained during Raya
Health Ministry to consider employing trained nurses from abroad
He said the shortages are isolated cases, mostly involving common drugs prescribed for cough, sore throat and upper respiratory infections, adding that medication for serious conditions are still available.

"It's not that the private hospitals do not have it, it's a supplier issue. When we order, the suppliers would say they are out of stock.

"It's also not a blanket issue. There may be a shortage of some original medicine yet there is plenty of supply of the generic version, or vice versa.

"We are managing it well using original, generic and alternative medications. Often times, the private healthcare sector would assist each other in private.

"And now the government has said it is open to helping us. We are very happy with the option," he said.

Health Minister Khairy Jamaluddin had yesterday laid out several measures to tackle the reported shortage of medicines affecting several private hospitals nationwide.

Among the measures include allowing affected private healthcare facilities to obtain the required medicine from the nearest privately-operated or government healthcare facility.

Other solutions include referring patients to the nearest government healthcare facility to continue their treatment.

Dr Kuljit explained that there are certain medications where private hospitals will still need to deal directly with the pharmaceutical companies.

"At private hospitals, we sometimes tend to use different types of medications that the government may not buy in big bulk, such as more costly and current medication," he said.

He also urged the government to engage with the pharmaceutical companies for a long-term solution.

"The authorities need to sit down with the pharmaceutical companies to establish where the issue is, whether it is due to a lack of raw material or even restrictions which prevent them from being brought in."