Private healthcare facilities can apply to borrow medicines

By Adib Povera - June 13, 2022 @ 7:58pm
Health Minister Khairy Jamaluddin said this was among the temporary solutions identified by his ministry to resolve the shortage of medicines affecting some private hospitals in the country. -NSTP file pic
Health Minister Khairy Jamaluddin said this was among the temporary solutions identified by his ministry to resolve the shortage of medicines affecting some private hospitals in the country. -NSTP file pic
KUALA LUMPUR: Private healthcare facilities facing a shortage in medicines can get the required medicines from the nearest privately-operated or government healthcare facility.

Health Minister Khairy Jamaluddin said this was among the temporary solutions identified by his ministry to resolve the shortage of medicines affecting some private hospitals in the country.

"Government healthcare facilities may consider lending the supply of medicines to private healthcare facilities at times of emergency, crisis and disasters.

"Before doing so, the government healthcare facilities must ensure their supply of medicines are sufficient for daily use at their respective facilities," he said in a statement today.

MORE NEWS
Shortage of medicines under control, not serious, says Dr Noor Azmi
Provide cancer patients access to precision medicine, healthcare stakeholders told [NSTTV]
MoH gathering input on alleged shortage of medicines
No shortage of medicines in MoH clinics and hospitals, says KJ [NSTTV]
Other solutions to temporarily resolve the issue was for the private healthcare facilities to refer their patients to the nearest government healthcare facility to continue their treatment.


This, however, may require a change in the medication regimen, subject to the availability of the medicines at the government healthcare facilities.

He said that patients could purchase the medicines from the community pharmacies according to the prescription provided by the respective health clinics or hospitals.

"The ministry hopes that these measures can temporarily resolve the problems as well as ensure that health services to the people at private healthcare facilities are not affected," he said.

Khairy added that the ministry had started sharing a list of alternatives to the medicines affected by the disruption with general practitioners, private hospitals and community pharmacies.