We all have a role to play

Most natural disasters in our country in recent times are not just due to natural factors, but stem from greed to exploit the Earth, damaging the environment.

They cause loss of lives and property damage, as well as permanent destruction of nature. The various exploitations also lead to the destruction of rain catchment areas.

Logging increasingly and worryingly causes forest covers to shrink, especially in rain catchment areas. Forests play a very important role in preventing floods.

The physical structure of trees, including the stems and roots, act as a natural deterrent in reducing the speed of rainwater flowing into the river, thus decreasing the risk of overflowing during heavy rains.

The roots also increase the grip of the soil, which slows down the movement of soil into the river, decreasing the risk of river erosion and landslides.

Pollution, such as piles of garbage, wood and stones, in the drainage system can cause the flow of water to be disrupted and not allow rainwater out quickly in the event of sudden heavy rains.

Similarly, the inability of drainage systems to accommodate large water capacity and movements that may be prevented by sedimentation of the soil heighten the risk of overflowing during heavy rains.

In addition, increasing human activity in urban areas affects the natural climate regulation system and causes various adverse effects to us and the environment.

It is undeniable that climate change and global warming are among the main contributors to catastrophic events, in particular floods, which are increasingly frequent due to extreme and unpredictable weather.

Overall, the risk management system in our country must be reviewed promptly to ensure that flood events such as the latest one do not happen again.

This requires interagency cooperation so that the causes of disasters can be identified and scrutinised, as well as more strategic and structured measures can be carried out.

It is also important for us to acknowledge that natural disasters are also caused by uncontrolled human activities or the "don't care" attitude.

There is also the need for programmes to raise public awareness among Malaysians in the face of disasters, such as being prepared and attentive to current issues and warnings issued by the authorities.

Next, they also need to have awareness of environmental care and understand the consequences of their daily actions that can affect the quality of the environment.

Ultimately, selfishness and greed for material wealth without thinking about the balance of ecosystems and natural sustainability are obviously detrimental and have adverse effects on fellow humans and other life on earth when disasters happen.

On this occasion, I would like to extend my sympathies to all recent flood victims. Hopefully, they will not lose hope and continue to endure this challenging period.

My tribute also goes to the volunteers who are tirelessly helping flood victims in all parts of the country.

I personally had the opportunity to join forces with some of the volunteers who came hundreds of kilometres away just to assist in rescue operations and post-flood activities.

I am touched to see this spirit of cooperation. My hope is the essence of "Keluarga Malaysia" will continue to be observed to help protect and care for the environment.