Preparing to face disasters
Prime Minister Datuk Seri Ismail Sabri Yaakob recently announced the government's decision to build more prevention and mitigation facilities in high-density cities to resolve flood woes.

This decision, which includes building tunnels to manage stormwater, was agreed upon at the Central Disaster Management Committee meeting on Feb 3.

The committee had also principally agreed on 17 suggestions proposed by the Environment and Water Ministry. Most are in the form of physical infrastructure for flood mitigation.

Some measures will not only involve the authorities in managing disasters, such as flooding, but also the community, in particular community leaders.
Community leaders will be empowered to act as first responders to ensure that necessary actions are taken at the onset of disasters.

Preparing for mitigating disasters entails the construction of physical infrastructure.

However, the need to educate the public on what to do during disasters is also of equal importance.

In this regard, Malaysia can benefit by learning from Japan, which has established disaster education centres in cities to educate and create awareness among residents in a non-formal way.

Japan, prone to many disasters, cannot afford to ill-manage disasters. Aside from technological and infrastructural measures, the country also focuses on disaster education.

In Tokyo, there is a centre known as Honjo Bosai-Kan, or Honjo Life Safety Learning Centre, which provides information, education and awareness on disasters, such as tsunamis, earthquakes and fires.

Visitors are given oral and written information, watch video clips of disasters as well as experience simulations and drills on what to do when disasters strike.

So Malaysia should look into ways to educate the public on what needs to be done during disasters.

At this juncture, we may not need a centre on disaster education like the ones in Japan.

Non-formal education centres — such as the National Science Centre and Petrosains in Kuala Lumpur, or those at the state level, such as the Terengganu Science and Creativity Centre — can be used for this purpose.

These centres can set up a section on disasters to provide information and simulations so that visitors can carry out hands-on learning regarding actions needed during disasters.

This will increase awareness and understanding on disasters and, more importantly, create an informed and resilient community that knows what to do in the face of disasters.

For Muslims, another form of education that is important is the fiqh of disasters.

There must be efforts to educate on taharah (cleanliness or purification), performing ibadah (acts of worship) as well as muamalat (dealings or transactions) during a disaster.

One such effort was initiated by the Perlis Mufti Department in January this year.

For Muslims, making preparations is a form of ikhtiyyar (endeavour), which is encouraged in Islam.

Islam teaches its believers that the resources given by Allah SWT must be used to mitigate the risk of disasters.

Disaster preparedness is key to effective and efficient disaster management.

For disaster management to be effective, the public must be well informed on the what, the why and the how of disasters.

Disasters can strike when least expected, and the community must be well-equipped to face them, not just from the physical and infrastructural aspects, but also mentally and spiritually.