E-cigarettes must remain in generational end game.

LETTER:Ever since the health minister announced a generational end game for tobacco, statements by industry-leaning "experts" touting vaping and heated tobacco products have sprouted exponentially.
Most of these alleged experts have not been involved in tobacco-control activities in Malaysia or elsewhere.
These third-party voices are brought in to astroturf vaping, trivialise growing evidence of vaping harms and counter government plans to ban e-cigarettes.
More importantly, their association with Big Tobacco remains undeclared.
In Malaysia, Dr Delon Human, head of United Kingdom-based Health Diplomats, claims "mounting scientific evidence that smokers prefer vaping and is effective to help them kick the habit". In South Africa, Dr Human has been exposed for collaborating with British American Tobacco (BAT) on harm reduction and was reportedly part of the company's strategy to reframe the company as a partner in tobacco control.
So-called "independent" opinion polls — the most recent by the Kantar Group — claim nearly half of Malaysian smokers chose vape to reduce tobacco use.
While the Kantar Group did not declare who funded its survey, major transnational tobacco companies, including BAT, Philip Morris International and Japan Tobacco, are among its clients and funders.
The Truth Initiative has exposed how Big Tobacco had spent millions in sponsored media content to shape public opinion through advertorials, and digital and social media channels to tout its "support" of public health, while continuing to market its deadly cigarettes.
Such media influencers sing the chorus prepared by the tobacco industry when they mouth "safer alternatives", "balanced approach", and "risk-proportionate regulation", just like when they raise the spectre of illicit trade to scare regulators, who are considering stricter tobacco controls.
The most recent global review of evidence shows that e-cigarettes carry significant health harms, particularly to youths, including as a gateway to smoking.
Harms of secondhand vaping have also been demonstrated. Nicotine is addictive: it is a scheduled poison per the Malaysian Poisons Act.
In addition to nicotine, e-cigarette aerosols include metals such as lead, nickel and zinc; cancer-causing substances, such as benzene; and flavours, many of which are toxic when inhaled. Flavours are also targeted to attract youths.
Australia, which has strong tobacco-control measures, has observed a significant increase in vaping among those 18 to 24 years old because of youth-appealing flavours peddled online.
To date, about 47 jurisdictions, including five Asean countries, have banned e-cigarettes and heated tobacco products.
Recently, Hong Kong made international news for having a single-digit smoking prevalence of 9.5 per cent, and started enforcing its ban on e-cigarettes to protect public health.
Singapore, with its long-standing ban on vape products, saw its smoking prevalence decline to 10.1 per cent in 2020. Among its other tobacco-control measures are plain tobacco packaging and setting the legal age for cigarette purchase at 21.
We urge the Malaysian health minister to double down on a generational end game that includes cigarettes and electronic smoking devices.