Floods reveal strong bond of unity that we must always uphold

CALAMITIES or disasters can happen to anyone and at any time. It is disheartening to see the occurrence of such episodes especially in our own homeland.

We must, however, avoid a fatalistic attitude towards the calamities that befall us.

Fatalistic thinking holds that everything that happens has been ill fated upon us and that there is nothing we could or should do to avoid it.

A fatalistic mentality also leads to a lack of preparedness in dealing with catastrophes as we believe that God has fated the particular calamity upon us and human efforts and struggles are meaningless.

The higher the level or the stronger the belief in fatalism in disasters, the lower the level of preparedness and actions taken in disaster management.

So, when a disaster or calamity strikes, only then do we realise that we are a little too late in our actions and the blame game begins.

However, amidst all of the sadness following the calamity of the recent devastating floods in the country, inspiring stories have also started to emerge. We see and read numerous feel good stories of how people of different races and religions came together to help those who had been adversely affected.

Mosques and gurdwaras offered food and shelter while various religious associations assisted in the distribution of food, clothing and personal hygiene kits, cleaning of homes and places of worships as well as initiated fundraising drives.

Individuals and organisations made up of people of different races, cultures and religious beliefs rescued those who were stranded in their houses by the floodwaters.

There were no conditions attached to their assistance, irregardless of ethnicity or religion, as long as these were lives that needed to be saved. Those are all inspiring stories about mankind and humanity.

As Malaysians this was an exceptional depiction of unity and togetherness. The nation's and country's character must be one of unity.

We must not allow other aspects, whether by groups or individuals, to exploit our differences. Instead, we must send a strong message that we are all united even if we are not in the midst of a disaster.

On the basis of humanity, our love for the country and its people must triumph over our differences. This country and its people value unity above all else.

History has shown how disharmony, hostility and hatred caused society to devolve into chaos and conflict.

We can also see the costs of social conflicts in other countries. Such conflicts would leave deep wounds and scars that would take a long time to heal. As a result, we must actually realise that the obligation for enhancing and preserving unity rests on the shoulders of every Malaysian.

During this time of calamity, all Malaysians can render help to those in need. To do this, we need to first identify the capacities that we are able to best contribute.

Not all people are able to contribute the same, but we need to appreciate every single help rendered to those who are facing hardship.

There are those who have the physical strength to go to the ground and contribute their efforts to clean houses and areas from mud, floodwaters and rubbish.

On the other hand, there are others who have contributed money and other forms of donation. There are also those who have the ability and expertise to provide counselling and motivation.

There are even child educators who provide emotional and psychological support to small children who were traumatised by the floods. Whatever help that we are able to provide, it is must be done with true sincerity.

Right now, it is time for community rebuilding. Lives have been lost, property and possessions have been destroyed, and the place that was once called home was either completely washed away by the force of the gushing floodwaters or inundated with mud and flood debris.

We need to spread the positive messages of hope and perseverance to the victims. It is a life test not just for them but for the rest of us as well. It is how we pull through together as a nation that matters. Allah the Almighty says in the Quran:

"Do the people think that they will be left to say, 'We believe' and they will not be tried? We certainly tested those before them. And ˹in this way Allah will clearly distinguish between those who are truthful and those who are liars." (Surah Al-Ankabut, 29: 2–3)

Most importantly, we must not allow the sentiments and deeds of solidarity and camaraderie to be something seasonal. We must also avoid allowing natural disasters to be the only catalyst for Malaysians to come together.

The disaster that we are presently experiencing as a society demonstrates that ordinary Malaysians are capable of bringing our own narratives that encourage mutual understanding and tolerance.

Unity should be above politics. For unity to actually work, we must learn to push aside our egos. If we fail to do so, that in itself is a true calamity for all of us.