Foreign investors still net buyers of Malaysian bonds

KUALA LUMPUR: Foreign investors continue their net buying activities in April for the second consecutive month totalling RM2.2 billion, the Malaysian Rating Corp (MARC) said.

The rating agency said Malaysia's bond market had recorded smaller foreign funds for April compared to RM4.0 billion in the previous month amid the global bond rout as the market braced for aggressive interest rate hikes by the US Federal Reserve (the Fed). 

It said the net outflows were mainly contributed by Malaysian Government Securities (MGS) at RM2.1 billion, followed by outflows from Government Investment Issues (GII) at RM490 million and corporate bonds at RM488 million. 

"Nevertheless, Malaysian Islamic Treasury Bills (MITB) and Malaysian Treasury Bills (MTB) registered net inflows of RM792 million and RM114 million in April," it said.

With regard to composition, MARC said the share of foreign holdings to total outstanding in MGS shrank further to 37.6 per cent from 38.8 per cent in March, the lowest since June 2020. 

Meanwhile, it said foreign holdings of GII and corporate bonds contracted slightly to 10.3 per cent and 1.7 per cent in April.

"In contrast, the net inflows of MTB and MITB expanded the share of their foreign holdings to 54.9 per cent and 20.4 per cent respectively," it said. 

According to MARC, local govies remained under heavy selling pressure and booked a hefty monthly loss as the global bond rout intensified in April 2022.

The bearish tone in the bond market was further amplified amid the acceleration of inflation in major economies, which in turn sparked jitters about more aggressive Fed rate hikes and a slowing global economy. 

"The beaten-down ringgit, which briefly touched its lowest level in almost two years at 4.37/US dollar on April 27, also contributed to negative sentiments. 

"The broad selling pushed MGS yields significantly higher by 38 bps to 67 bps m-o-m and settled at their highest level in more than two years. 

"Of note, the 10 year MGS yield closed the month at 4.38 per cent, the highest since December 2016," it added.