Sustainable, safer housing policies needed

Malaysia lies in a geologically stable region, which is almost disaster free. However, the country is routinely affected by floods, droughts, landslides, haze and man-made disasters.

Every year, floods account for a significant number of casualties, epidemics, damage to properties and crops, and other intangible losses.

In the past two decades or so, the country has experienced extreme weather and climate events, which led to severe floods in 2006, 2007, 2010, 2011, 2014 and, recently, 2021.

Additionally, during the 2021 floods, more than 66,000 people were displaced, at least 54 people died, and several went missing. Eight of the 11 states in Peninsular Malaysia were affected.

Adding to the concern, Covid-19 cases were detected among evacuees as well. In addition, a significant amount of houses in the flooded areas were destroyed.

Up to December last year, the Housing and Local Government Ministry had identified 8,257 houses affected by floods. Of the total, 118 need complete reconstruction, while 8,139 require repairs.

The numbers are expected to increase as there are states that are still affected by floods.

When houses are damaged or destroyed, communities must decide whether to rebuild it, and if so, where and when. Such decisions shape the long-term character of a community, as well as the recovery of households who rely upon existing housing.

These households are often more exposed to hazards, and after a disaster, they are often at the mercy of landlords and local governments to repair or rebuild houses they can access and afford.

Housing is a key component of sustainable disaster recovery.

Although housing is just one element of recovery, it is a fundamental and often controversial issue, particularly in terms of equity and sustainability.

Disasters can impact housing directly through damage or destruction of homes, or indirectly through increases in property prices due to the sudden drop in supply.

Rebuilding houses following a disaster has the same constraints as during normal conditions, including location and land availability, the will and capacity of local agencies, and the availability of external resources, among others.

Houses tend to be disproportionately located in hazard-prone areas, where the price of land is often the lowest, causing disproportionately higher levels of damage during disasters to lower-income households.

Following a disaster, rebuilding in hazard-prone areas often triggers new regulatory and insurance burdens, making recovery more costly and difficult when redevelopment on these sites is restricted by contemporary floodplain development rules and regulations.

Permanent housing replacement is primarily market-driven and housing is highly regulated and dependent upon appropriate region, infrastructure, hazard and mortgage insurance, which is regulated at the state and federal levels.

Municipal decisions regarding land, allocation of public resources, communications, recovery plans and public involvement are also essential.

Local government capacity also dictates recovery since housing reconstruction can be overwhelming, including permit, inspection, zoning, financing, negotiating with the federal government, identifying new housing models and more sustainable designs.

People should not be put at risk of being flood victims through any proposed housing development on sloped areas, retention ponds and others.

Therefore, existing housing policies should consider providing safety from natural disasters and guidelines for housing reconstruction.

If the destroyed houses were reconstructed as it were before, it will put flood victims in a similar risk.

The government can consider compulsory insurance of loss to property caused by natural disaster by incorporating it in housing prices. It can provide financial protection to those insured, preventing post-disaster funding and liquidity soon after the incident.

In conclusion, sustainable governance in the process of decision-making and government-assistance programmes are important aspects in disaster recovery.