Kedah HFMD cases on downward trend, no new cluster reported.


ALOR STAR: Kedah has recorded a downward trend for new Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease (HFMD) cases for the second consecutive week, with no new cluster reported in the state.
State Health and Local Government Committee chairman Datuk Dr Mohd Hayati Othman said 702 new cases were reported in the 23rd Epidemiology Week (EW23) from June 5 to 11.
"Compared with the previous week, this is a decline of 87 cases, or 11 per cent," he said in a statement.
The state had recorded 789 cases during EW22, a decrease of 33 per cent compared with the number of cases recorded in the previous week. 
Dr Mohd Hayati added that until June 11, the cumulative number of HFMD cases reported in the state rose to 4,894 cases, a jump of 507 per cent compared to the corresponding period in 2019, prior to the Covid-19 pandemic.
"The highest number of cases were reported in four districts of Kuala Muda with 1,187 cases, followed by Kubang Pasu (726), Kulim (699) and Kota Setar (487).
"All of the cases reported had mild symptoms and received outpatient treatment. No cases reported severe complications or required intensive treatment."
Last Thursday, Health Minister Khairy Jamaluddin was reported as saying that the HFMD infection cases nationwide would see a downward trend within the next two or three weeks.
He had said this projection was based on the theory that children's immunity levels improve after being exposed to the virus, as HFMD is a localised, seasonal disease.
Since early this year, 50 outbreaks of HFMD had been reported in Kedah, with 49 of them reported in early childhood education centres.
HFMD is caused by infection from various types of viruses, especially the Coxsackie A16 virus and Enterovirus 71 (EV71).
The virus is known to spread through contact via saliva, blisters, and faeces and the majority of infections show mild symptoms such as fever followed by a blistering rash on the hands, feet, mouth and tongue.
Almost all patients with HFMD recover without the need for specific treatment within seven to 10 days.
However, EV71 infection can cause severe complications such as encephalitis (brain infection), pneumonitis (lung infection), and myocarditis (heart muscle infection).
The Kedah Health Department advised the public, especially those with young children, to take the precautions to reduce the risk of infection, including maintaining personal hygiene and washing hands regularly, with water and soap or hand sanitiser.