SEPANG: The Health Ministry has maintained that there is no medicine shortage at government-run hospitals and clinics.

Health Minister Khairy Jamaluddin said the ministry is monitoring its central contracts to ensure there is sufficient supply of medicine at all government medical facilities.

"There is still enough supply of medicine at our facilities. However, at the moment, there is a shortage of supply at private hospitals and clinics.

"I have instructed the ministry's pharmaceutical service division to work closely with pharmaceutical associations and manufacturers to look for alternatives should the shortage prolong," he told reporters today.

Khairy said he has also instructed the ministry's secretary-general to formulate a mid and long-term strategy to prevent the same problem from recurring in the future.

He said the strategy may include identifying and exploring new countries to source medicine supply, as well as working closely with local pharmaceutical industries to develop medicine.

He said the ministry, on June 2, had conducted an engagement session with various stakeholders including the Malaysian Organisation of Pharmaceutical Industries, Pharmaceutical Association of Malaysia and the Malaysian Association of Pharmaceutical Suppliers (MAPS) on the shortage of medicine.

During the session, he said, the ministry was told that shortages in medicine involved over-the-counter medication for the treatment of fever, cold, flu, cough, antibiotics, diarrhoea as well as vitamins, especially vitamin C.

"The problem arose due to a shortage in raw materials (to produce the medicines), as well as disruption related to Covid-19 where there was increase in demand during the Omicron wave that resulted many people stocking up on medicine at an amount more than they needed.

"Other factors which contributed to the shortage in medicine included a delay in the supply chain in manufacturing, including packaging materials," he said.

Earlier, when launching the National World Food Safety Day 2022, Khairy encouraged home-based food operators and handlers to register with the ministry.

This, he said, to ensure the safety of the food prepared for consumers.

He said although the registration is on voluntary basis, this will provide options to consumers who order the food through p-hailing services.
