Libresse holds campaign to understand the womb

By Syida Lizta Amirul Ihsan - June 9, 2022 @ 12:00pm
Feminine care brand Libresse is having an educational campaign, taking an exploratory journey to where life begins.

The Wonders of the Womb (WoW) campaign starts with a virtual discovery interactive experience at the campaign microsite at https://libressemy.com/wow/.

Other initiatives include retail promotions, on-ground initiatives in malls, universities and other locations via roving trucks nationwide, and a collaboration with advocates of Peduli Merah, dedicated to addressing period poverty.

The campaign aims to deepen awareness and normalise conversations on women's and menstrual health.

MORE NEWS
Shareholders should understand the risks
Ukraine: Understanding the concern of the other
'Station health inspectors at bazaar locations'
Police support move on political campaign ban
"Even in these modern times, there remains low understanding about women's health. Our consumer research indicates that two in three women find it difficult to ask questions or talk openly about the topic," Vinda Malaysia feminine care marketing manager Cheryl Wang says.

"This clearly shows that there's still a lot to do to bridge the information gap in the knowledge about women's health and reproductive system,"

The campaign aims to educate women on their health and reproductive system.
The campaign aims to educate women on their health and reproductive system.
The campaign opens the door for women to take a deep dive into their reproductive system and learn more about the gift of womanhood.

The womb, - where life begins - is stronger than most women realise - in fact it's the strongest muscle in a woman's body and has an ability to expand up to 1,000 times its original size in order to support a growing foetus, thereafter reverting to its original size. And it does this every time a woman bears a child.

Consultant obstetrician and gynaecologist Dr Patricia Lim Su-Lyn, says knowledge and empowerment comes hand in hand.

"Many young women have questions they are afraid to ask, therefore don't know how to better care for their private area, or even recognise signs that something is wrong and seek medical advice,"

The brand also held the Wonders of the Womb event, jointly organised with Peduli Merah and the International Islamic University of Malaysia (IIUM) Student Union on June 8.

The panelists were assistant professor Dr Fatimah Al-Attas, who teaches sociology at IIUM, and advisor of Peduli Merah and and Dr Lim.

"Menstruation is a natural part of being a woman. Menstrual health should be accessible to all and should not be associated with shame or stigma," says Dr Fatimah.