Shortage of medicines under control, not serious, says Dr Noor Azmi

By Nor Ain Mohamed Radhi - June 3, 2022 @ 2:45pm
Deputy Health Minister Datuk Dr Noor Azmi Ghazali at the launch of Nutrition Month Malaysia today. - NSTP/ AZIAH AZMEE
Deputy Health Minister Datuk Dr Noor Azmi Ghazali at the launch of Nutrition Month Malaysia today. - NSTP/ AZIAH AZMEE
KUALA LUMPUR: Consumers still have alternatives to medicines that were reportedly facing severe supply shortages.

Deputy Health Minister Datuk Dr Noor Azmi Ghazali said there were alternative medicines and brands of medicines with the same purpose that are available in the market that consumers could choose from.

"For example, for high blood pressure, we have various medicines for it, be it patented or generic, with both having the same effects.

"Having said that, in general, we are not facing a serious shortage of medicines. Everything is still under control," he told reporters after the launch of Nutrition Month Malaysia today.

MORE NEWS
Private hospitals also face medication shortage, resort to alternatives
MoH gathering input on alleged shortage of medicines
No shortage of medicines in MoH clinics and hospitals, says KJ [NSTTV]
Private healthcare facilities can apply to borrow medicines
Dr Noor Azmi was responding to a question on the shortages of medicine supply in the market.


He said the Health Ministry is currently monitoring the situation at its health facilities nationwide, as well as at private health facilities.


"The shortages could be attributed to the movement control orders and late delivery of raw materials sourced from other countries.

"As such, we will continue to monitor this situation to ensure the continuity of quality, safe and effective medicines for Malaysians."

During the press conference, Dr Noor Azmi also urged consumers not to make panic purchases of medicines.

"Please refrain from panic buying by unnecessarily hoarding medications which were not immediately needed.

"We have enough supply and the situation is under control."

Yesterday, the Malaysian Medical Association (MMA) urged the authorities to address the shortage of medicine supply in the local pharmaceutical industry fast.

Its president Dr Koh Kar Chai said there was a notable shortage of certain medicines in the market recently.

He said although it was not a new phenomenon, the supply and demand situation must be corrected soon.

Read more : MoH gathering input on alleged shortage of medicines

Meanwhile, on the Nutrition Month Malaysia, which is themed Fight Covid-19 and NCD (non-communicable diseases) with Healthy Nutrition, Dr Noor Azmi said the ministry has identified eight main messages in its effort to ensure that the right nutrition can be understood and practised by the public.

The eight messages are to practice healthy eating to fight Covid-19 and NCD; eat healthily - what and how; boost immunity with appropriate food; reduce intake of sugar, oil and salt; eat out more healthily; give your child a right start; move your body-fit life, and maintain a healthy weight to reduce the risk of NCD.

Dr Noor Azmi said various activities will be carried out at state level nationwide; physically and virtually using social media platforms.

"At the same time, the Health Ministry will intensify the 'Read the Label' campaign to increase awareness of the importance of reading labels, especially when purchasing food and beverage products.

"This is to provide awareness of choosing healthier food and beverages by reading the labels."

He said among the labels on the product that consumers can refer to are the nutrition information panel, the Healthier Choice Logo (HCL), the Energy Icon, and the nutrition and ingredients list.

"This is also in line with the government's efforts to increase the level of health literacy among Malaysians."

During the event, the ministry recognised its strategic partners, namely supermarkets that have agreed to carry out nutrition advocacy activities at their respective premises.

The recognition as 'NutriHub' was given to Aeon, Lotus's, Giant, TF Value, Econsave, Bataras and Pantai Selamat supermarkets.

"These supermarkets are expected to support us by promoting the message of nutrition and provide an environment that supports healthy eating habits to consumers such as providing incentives or discounts on certain food items and to encourage visitors to consume more fruits and vegetables as well as food and beverage products that have the HCL logo."