Khairy: Panic buying not the factor behind medicine supply shortage [NSTTV]
By Adie Zulkifli - June 9, 2022 @ 2:25pm

ALOR STAR: The current shortage of medicine at selected private health facilities nationwide was not triggered by panic buying among consumers.

Health Minister Khairy Jamaluddin said the issue was likely due to a surge in demand for common disease medicines during the spike of the Omicron variant wave early this year followed by the Hand, Food and Mouth Disease (HFMD) outbreak.

"There was no panic buying but most probably due to a surge in demand during the Omicron variant wave followed by the HFMD outbreak and other diseases.

"This is based on the fact that most of the medicines said to be in low stock were for common diseases such as flu, fever and headache.

MORE NEWS
HFMD: Over 8,000 cases recorded in Perak so far this year
Panic buying on the eve of aidilfitri
Kelantan records over 4,000 HFMD cases this year
Hazmat suits and panic buying: Covid images return to China
"Probably there is a link between the waves (Omicron and HFMD) which drove the increased demand and purchasing among consumers," he told reporters at the Sultanah Bahiyah Hospital here today.


Earlier, Khairy attended the handing over of medical supply equipment from the government of Japan for Malaysian public hospitals in battling the Covid-19 pandemic worth nearly RM20 million.

The aid, which was presented by Japanese ambassador to Malaysia, Takahashi Katsuhiko, was part of Japan's Grant Aid for the economic and social development programme 2020 benefitting 81 public hospitals nationwide.

Khairy also reassured the people that Malaysia had ample supply of medicine.

"I wish to give an assurance that the medicine supply in Malaysia is sufficient.

"We can't say this (supply shortage) is happening nationwide. It is only confined to certain areas and types of medicine.

"We just need to identify specifically where and what type of medicines are low in stock and we will be working with pharmaceutical companies to address the issue," he said.

Khairy said the ministry was getting reports on the shortage among private health facilities on a daily basis and assured them that the ministry was committed to assisting them to obtain the supply.

Khairy added that the Health Ministry was also looking into the possibility of sourcing alternative medicines or importing supply from other countries.

"I have instructed the ministry to check with the manufacturers and importers to identify which medicines are low in stock.

"We are also getting feedback from the Malaysian Medical Association and private clinics to identify where and which medicines are short in supply," he said.

On Tuesday, Khairy clarified that there was no medicine shortage at government-run hospitals and clinics as the shortage of supply was only reported at private hospitals and clinics.

He was reported as saying that the shortages in medicine involved over-the-counter medication for the treatment of fever, cold, flu, cough, antibiotics, diarrhoea as well as vitamins, especially vitamin C.

He had said the problem arose due to a shortage in raw materials (to produce the medicines), as well as disruptions related to Covid-19 where there was increase in demand during the Omicron wave that resulted in many people stocking up on medicine.

Other factors which contributed to the shortage in medicine included a delay in the supply chain in manufacturing, including packaging materials.