Let's not be caught flat-footed when the next natural disaster strikes

THE Lunar New Year two years ago took place in what felt like a different world.
Since then, we have had political transitions, a pandemic and have endured social isolation and economic contraction.
We have seen increases in the cost of living accompanied by plummeting incomes, a slowing economy and rising inequality.
All this happened before Malaysia was struck by once-in-100-years floods, which may have been one in 100 in the past but will be commonplace from now on.
The past two years have been a crash course in Malaysia's disaster planning, management and response, and the worst is far from over.

Covid-19 will probably abate at some stage.

But another virus might take its place and, in the meantime, the threat of climate change isn't only growing — it's here.

We might realise it now that the 2020s have ushered in an age of disasters.

Whether these disasters are due to economic or geopolitical happenstances or induced or exacerbated by climate change, one thing is for certain: Malaysia has some way to go to ensure its resilience against headwinds coming our way.

The pandemic's toll has been grave. About 10 per cent of the population has been infected.

More than 32,000 have died of Covid-19. But its consequences are not limited to lives lost or days spent hospitalised.

And the economic and emotional trauma of two years of stop-start economic activity has created short-term consequences.

Still, these may be insignificant when one considers the long-term costs of the pandemic.

Last month, the Employees Provident Fund reported that contributors withdrew RM101 billion, with 3.6 million people left with less than RM1,000 in their provident funds.

The bulk of pandemic-related suffering has been borne by B40 households.

The irony is that not only have the pandemic and lockdowns worsened their plight, but how we went about coping with the repercussions has set those at the bottom of the socio-economic ladder further back.

This came despite stimulus packages worth RM530 billion, compared with the RM297 billion in the 2020 Budget.

The frightening thing is that if our response to the first disaster of the 2020s entailed throwing crazy money at the problem, then what do we have left for the next one?

The devastating floods offered a second, fresher test.

Estimates indicate that the losses suffered may run up to RM6.5 billion without factoring in output losses.

Other costs may arise, as the Meteorological Department projects heavy rainfall well into March with the risk of fur-
her flooding.

These costs may pale in comparison to Covid-related stimulus spending but are still significant.

Budgetary allocations for climate-related projects — including flood-mitigation efforts, forestry and biodiversity conservation and low-carbon energy programmes — totalled RM1.4 billion this year.

Climate change will exacerbate floods, yet we are spending more responding to the disasters than addressing their root cause in the first place.

In 2014, floods caused property damage of more than RM2 billion.

The government responded with RM1.5 billion in aid.

So why are we still caught flat-footed whenever disasters strike?

As we look ahead to a future of more disasters, one thing is certain: a sizeable proportion of Malaysians are ill-equipped to face challenges that may arise.

Our habitual post-disaster response of throwing money at problems is costly and unsustainable.

Instead, we need an active, pre-emptive approach.

It starts with offering low-income households more opportunities to survive difficulties.

We must find ways to enhance economic security: wages must rise to combat Covid-induced inflation.

We need to enhance social protections, as existing aid falls far short of what is needed to improve the lot of low-income Malaysians. Targeted basic-income schemes would be a start.

We need to boost the budget on climate resiliency.

Rising temperatures will exacerbate rainfall and floods, threaten food and water security, challenge public health and healthcare capacity and infrastructure.

These will have direct and indirect economic consequences and the least we can do is ensure that the next time a disaster strikes, we are ready for it and not stuck scrambling, clutching and drowning.