NST Leader: Disaster management crisis?

The floods on Saturday and the emergency response to it lead to an unequivocal conclusion: we are not good at handling disasters.

But what we are good at is finger pointing. It is almost another Saturday, yet politicians and people given the task to manage disasters are parcelling blame. It is centre versus state all over again. And within the state, it is centre versus local authorities. Come on, people. We can do better.

As National Professors Council senior fellow Dr Jeniri Amir told this newspaper on Wednesday, excuses given by the authorities only magnify weaknesses and the perceived systemic flaws in handling the flood crisis. Interestingly, they all admit that something went wrong on Saturday.

But none wanted to be held accountable for the disaster that claimed 37 lives, the latest death toll as this Leader went to press. Where is the National Disaster Management Agency and where is the National Security Council, are not infrequent questions. Not just from flood victims, but experts, too. Sinar Harian quotes meteorology professor Datuk Dr Azizan Abu Samah as having asked them, too. Fair questions, we would say. These agencies must not seek to silence those who ask these questions.

As we look ahead to a future of more disasters, one thing is certain: a sizeable proportion of Malaysians are ill-equipped to face challenges that may arise.

Our habitual post-disaster response of throwing money at problems is costly and unsustainable.

Instead, we need an active, pre-emptive approach.

It starts with offering low-income households more opportunities to survive difficulties.

We must find ways to enhance economic security: wages must rise to combat Covid-induced inflation.

We need to enhance social protections, as existing aid falls far short of what is needed to improve the lot of low-income Malaysians. Targeted basic-income schemes would be a start.

We need to boost the budget on climate resiliency.

Rising temperatures will exacerbate rainfall and floods, threaten food and water security, challenge public health and healthcare capacity and infrastructure.

These will have direct and indirect economic consequences and the least we can do is ensure that the next time a disaster strikes, we are ready for it and not stuck scrambling, clutching and drowning.
For if they do, then we will never learn from our failures. As they say, our best teacher is our last mistake. Let's learn from it, willingly or unwillingly. And please, do not blame the weather for human errors.

Climate change isn't a cause, but an effect of human omissions and commissions. Having been wrong so long, we think we are right. Not so fast. Pause and ponder. Most importantly, act to make it right.

Yes, something is amiss with our disaster management. Most certainly with our emergency response. It is almost a week since the floods, yet the cry for help hasn't receded. Some lawmakers on Monday called for a debate on the floods in Parliament with the aim to uncover the weaknesses in the way we respond to disasters.

The Dewan Rakyat speaker disallowed it. Perhaps it is a question of timing. MPs should be out there with the people offering emergency help, not showing their oratory skills in times of crisis. To be fair, some were there. Many weren't.

They must show the same enthusiasm they display on the eve of elections, going door-to-door pleading with voters to get them elected. Elections over, MPs or assemblymen become as rare as hen's teeth. Be that as it may, such a debate must be held when this is all over. And the speaker must allow it. The nation needs to know.

At least the fear of a national scrutiny will make the disaster management agencies put on their best behaviour.

For now, it is clear not all the parts of the disaster management organisation are working in harmony. It is time for a major revamp. Just tinkering with the structure won't do. Neither will adding a few people here and there help.

It has to be a McKinsey type of strategy-structure-systems-staff-skills review. Anything less will not close the gaping holes the Saturday's floods have revealed. This isn't a call for the government to spend millions on management consultants.

We have had so many consultants before, so we should be skilled enough to do it on our own. After all, engaging consultants is like asking them to tell the time from our watches.