NST Leader: Earth in crisis

Planet Earth, our only home, is fast becoming uninhabitable. No, do not go looking for something to blame. Like natural disasters.
Natural disaster is an oxymoron. There is nothing natural about disasters. Natural disaster is a carefully crafted misnomer of a term to deflect human responsibility. And the faster we realise this, the better it is for us.
Since the advent of man — in the calculation of Malaysian Islamic scholar Syed Muhammad Naquib Al-Attas, that happened between 7,000 and 8,000 years ago — we have, through our collective misbehaviour, turned nature against humanity.
Except for a significant some, many among us don't see natural disasters as a divine censure for our misdeeds. But it is, as Perak's ruler Sultan Nazrin Muizzuddin Shah pointed out to the state assembly in his royal address on March 28: "a divine censure of our misbehaviour, turning nature against us". We could not have put it better.
Human beings are one greedy lot, chasing after development and business growth all in the name of glory and profits. Sans care nor consideration for the environment. We have lost the loving feeling.
Still, we make great claims of being lovers of nature even ad copies wouldn't dare assert. But our actions don't match our words. Consider our abuse of plastic.
Malaysia is ranked number 2 in Asia when it comes to usage of plastic. This isn't the kind of regional or global table that we should rush to top, given where all the plastics materials — much of it not biodegradable — land up in.
Yes, we use close to 70kg per capita per year. And if numbers are needed for how much plastic on average we dump into the sea every year, here it is: 30,000 tonnes.
Here is the thing. Plastic or its debris that is dumped takes 400 years to decompose. Put in the language of human lifespan, it takes all of 13 generations to decompose. This isn't love of nature in any language.
We have to change before the climate changes more. The latest report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change tells us that there is still hope.
If not to cool the Earth again, at least to keep warming at 1.5°C. But the hope is only a small window.
Climate scientists say the planet has already warmed to 1.1°C. Every nation and every one of the eight billion souls must change before the climate changes the Earth into an uninhabitable planet.
There is only one way to arrest climate change. We must put our planet before profit and pride. Otherwise, nowhere and no one will be spared.
Climate action comes before climate fear, in the words of The Guardian. Keeping global warming at 1.5°C requires a sincere whole-nation approach. Or to put it in the royal words of Sultan Nazrin: "Every vision, idea, aspiration and plan can only be realised if administered by a trustworthy, sincere, honest and transparent machinery; an administration that is transparent, an administration that is free from corruption and abuse of power and an administration that is accountable to the people, more so accountable to Allah."
Climate crimes aren't crimes yet in the eyes of man-made laws, but they certainly are in the eyes of the Almighty. Repent and reset. What better time than Ramadan.