Omicron sub-variants: Stepping up surveillance at international entry points, high-density areas
By Hamzah Osman - June 11, 2022 @ 4:15pm
Health deputy minister Datuk Dr Noor Azmi Ghazali (2nd from left) said the steps were among measures being rolled out after Malaysia detected two BA.5 and one BA.2.12.1 cases, both of which are Omicron sub-variants recently.  - NSTP/ HAMZAH OSMAN
Health deputy minister Datuk Dr Noor Azmi Ghazali (2nd from left) said the steps were among measures being rolled out after Malaysia detected two BA.5 and one BA.2.12.1 cases, both of which are Omicron sub-variants recently. - NSTP/ HAMZAH OSMAN
LANGKAWI: The Health Ministry is stepping up surveillance at international entry points and high-density areas following the confirmation of two Omicron sub-variants cases being detected in the country.

Its deputy minister Datuk Dr Noor Azmi Ghazali said the steps were among measures being rolled out after Malaysia detected two BA.5 and one BA.2.12.1 cases, both of which are Omicron sub-variants recently.

"We are stepping up surveillance at our international entry points and high-density areas, besides improving preparedness at hospitals by ensuring we have sufficient beds and Intensive Care Units.

"We are also promoting Covid-19 vaccination and booster shots to the people who have yet to take the shots while continuing to observe standard operating procedures to curb Covid-19 transmission," he told reporters after opening the national-level World Tuberculosis Day 2022 at Telaga Walk, Pantai Cenang today.

MORE NEWS
﻿#JOM! STAY: On point at Four Points Desaru
Omicron subvariant BA.2 more infectious than original: Study
Djokovic confirms error made on Australian travel entry form
Sabah Immigration denies issuing instructions for payment of entry permits
Present were Kedah State Assembly speaker Datuk Juhari Bulat and state Health director Dr Othman Warijo.


On Thursday Health Minister Khairy Jamaluddin announced Malaysia has detected two BA.5 and one BA.2.12.1 cases, both of which are Omicron sub-variants.

Khairy said this was the first time the variant lineages were detected in the country.

Meanwhile, Noor Azmi said a total 9,474 tuberculosis cases were reported nationwide during the first half of this year.

"The figure shows a 13 per cent jump compared to the corresponding period last year 11 per cent lower compared to the same period in 2019.

"The country has set a target to eliminate tuberculosis by achieving 90 per cent drop in disease transmission and bringing down the death cases to 95 per cent by 2025," he said.