Paxlovid to be used in private hospitals
By Dawn Chan - June 9, 2022 @ 9:00am
Paxlovid is the  first antiviral medication being used in Malaysia  to treat Covid-19 patients.  REUTERS PIC
Paxlovid is the first antiviral medication being used in Malaysia to treat Covid-19 patients. REUTERS PIC
KUALA LUMPUR: The use of the oral antiviral drug, Paxlovid, will be expanded to private hospitals following a successful run in public hospitals with 1,364 people fully recovered up to June 5.

Health Minister Khairy Jamaluddin, in a statement yesterday, said there were no serious side effects among the patients who took the Covid-19 medication. The trial run at public hospitals started on April 15.

"The priority of the Paxlovid treatment are Covid-19 high-risk patients. This treatment is proven safe and effective. It can also reduce severe effects of the infection, as well as the Covid-19 death rate."

Paxlovid is the first antiviral medication Malaysia is using to treat Covid-19 patients with light to medium symptoms or those in categories 2 and 3 of the infection.

MORE NEWS
Private hospitals also face medication shortage, resort to alternatives
Private hospitals step up to assist Klang Valley flood victims
Govt not controlling prices of Covid-19 vaccines at private hospitals
Private hospital staff loses savings, home in fire
Khairy said expanding the use of Paxlovid to selected private healthcare facilities is important to improve Covid-19 patients' access to it.


He said as Malaysia had entered the transition phase to endemicity and with the borders reopened, high-risk groups such as senior citizens, those with comorbidities and the unvaccinated must be given the best protection against severe Covid-19 infection.

"The Paxlovid medication will be given for free to patients at the private health facilities.

"However, patients are still subjected to the consultation service charges, as well as other related fees determined by the private health facility."

Additionally, Khairy said, the ministry would begin the monoclonal antibodies tixagevimab plus cilgavimab (Evusheld) treatment soon to ensure high-risk groups could get optimum protection against Covid-19 infection.

He said studies had shown that Evusheld antibody medication could protect a person from contracting Covid-19 for six months after inoculation.

"For now, Evusheld will be dispensed only at government hospitals. It can be used as a pre-exposure prophylaxis for those who have not been infected with Covid-19, but are at high risk of catching the virus.

"The assessment of the patient's eligibility for the medication will be done by the treating medical specialist. The criteria include one must be 12 years old and above, weigh more than 40kg and must be in the medium- to severe-immunocompromised group.

"This is taking into consideration the immune reaction of this group to Covid-19 vaccination. They may not reach the satisfactory level of immunity or those who cannot take the full immunisation due to medical grounds or have a history of severe reactions to the vaccination."

The administration of the antibodies, he said, would be done via two consecutive intramuscular injections of tixagevimab and cilgavimab.

As for the immunocompromised patients who had received the Covid-19 vaccine, Evusheld must be given at least two weeks after the inoculation, said Khairy.

He also said the ministry had always been working to equip the nation's health system with equipment, as well as safe and high-quality medicines to safeguard the people from Covid-19 or serious effects.

"With medications and treatment methods that are always being enhanced, the ministry is confident that Malaysia is now on the right track to go through the transition phase to endemicity effectively and safely.

"The ministry will continue to be committed to boosting people's access to medication for treatment or to arrest the Covid-19 transmission in Malaysia.

"We will also ensure the fatality numbers due to Covid-19 and patients treated in the intensive care units are low and under control."

Meanwhile, Association of Private Hospitals Malaysia president Datuk Dr Kuljit Singh said private specialists would follow the guidelines provided by the ministry on the prescription of Paxlovid.

"There will be no charge on the antivirals except for consultation fees and other hospital charges.

"We are able to treat Covid-19 patients more effectively and patients seeking treatment in private hospitals will have better recovery and a reduced probability of getting into categories four and five of the infection."