Over-developed Penang vulnerable to natural disasters - NRE Minister

KUCHING: The Federal Government has reiterated that Penang is vulnerable to natural disasters including floods and landslides as there is an unbalanced and excessive development in the state.

Natural Resources and Environment Minister Datuk Seri Dr Wan Junaidi Tuanku Jaafar said unlike other states in the country, Penang was more exposed to risks as there were several developments projects taking shape in the state.

He said hillslope development projects were the major factor which had exposed Penang to natural disasters.

“Hillslope is supposed to serve as water retention during rains.

“Due to the hillslope development projects, the area not longer can absorb water, which will flow down the hills together with soil and sediments.

“This situation worsens when the drainage and irrigation system is not upgraded as the infrastructure cannot cope with the massive rainfall.

“When there is a poor drainage and irrigation system, lack of forest to absorb water from rainfall.. this is what has happened,” he said after conducting a site visit to the site of drainage works in Kampung Tabuan Melayu here today.

There have been increasing calls from non-governmental organisations and politicians from both side of the political divide against the DAP-led Penang government to stop all hillslope development.

Their calls followed the major floods which wrecked havoc in Penang with seven casualties and the relocation more than 5,000 people.

Junaidi advised the Penang government leadership to have faith in and listen to the recommendations from experts including the ministry.

“The ministry has experts from the Environment Department, Drainage and Irrigation Department and National Hydraulic Research Institute of Malaysia.

“These government departments and agencies have people with expertise on water that can benefit the state government.

“Above all, the state government should reduce, or even better stop development projects involving hillslope areas,” he said.