Malaysia carries "lowest risks", says MARC as it affirms the country's AAA  rating

KUALA LUMPUR: MARC Ratings has affirmed Malaysia's sovereign rating of AAA/stable, saying the country carries the lowest relative risk for reasons that include its authority to tax and set interest rates. 

"The rating reflects the country's credit strengths including a competitive and well-diversified economy that has kept growth relatively resilient and stable. 

"For 2022, we expect real gross domestic product growth to rebound further to 5.7 per cent. 

"Meanwhile, Malaysia's position in the 2021 edition of the Institute for Management Development (IMD) World Competitiveness Rankings improved to number 25 from number 27 previously," MARC said in a statement today.

It noted that Malaysia's current account balance remained in surplus, reflecting its trade competitiveness.

Malaysia also enjoys a healthy external position and adequate official foreign reserves. 

"The stable outlook reflects our expectation of ongoing policy continuity and continued stable economic management. 

"It also reflects our expectation that Malaysia's external position will remain healthy," said MARC. 

MARC said the country's key credit challenges included economic scarring from Covid-19, which pushed macro-financial risks significantly higher. 

While the government seems committed to fiscal consolidation, the firm is of the view that its efforts are losing momentum.

"We think consolidation plans could be put on hold in the near to medium term to avoid jeopardising economic recovery. 

"The country has started treating Covid-19 as an endemic disease and we think policies to support steady growth should come first, rather than fiscal consolidation, especially given the economic damage," it said. 

Going forward, MARC said credit positive developments would include sustained fiscal consolidation efforts such as revenue broadening measures that can improve both fiscal and debt metrics, as well as a solidified reform agenda which can lead to stronger institutions and governance. 

Conversely, credit negative developments will include further deterioration of fiscal and debt metrics amid efforts to repair the economic damage as well as further weakening of the government's appetite for reform and consequently growth potential due to rising political noise.