870 cases of natural disasters in Selangor since last year
SHAH ALAM: Selangor has witnessed 870 cases of natural disasters in nine districts since last year, the state legislative assembly was told today.

Sementa assemblyman Dr Daroyah Alwi said the natural disasters include floods, flash floods, storms, landslides, peatland fires and fire incidents in forest reserves.

She said from 2016 to Oct 22 this year, Klang recorded the highest number of cases at 185, followed by Hulu Langat (142), Gombak (132), Petaling (106), Sabak Bernam (77), Hulu Selangor (72), Kuala Selangor (62), Kuala Langat (62) and Sepang (52).

Daroyah, who is also the Selangor Health, Welfare, Women and Family Affairs Committee chairman, said the state government has allocated RM50,000 for each district to aid disaster victims in an emergency.
“Selangor is not exempted from the effects brought about by climate change to the environment. The climate and weather have changed in recent years.

“In efforts to mitigate natural disasters, the state government has taken various initiatives, such as the RM50,000 allocation for disaster aid and relief at each district.

“Besides, the district officer will be able to withdraw RM10,000 from automated teller machines at any one given time to help victims,” she said.

Asked on why some applications for monetary aid were delayed or rejected, Daroyah said it was because there were incomplete application forms, applications from non-Malaysian citizens, overlapping applications and there were cases of citizens taking advantage of the aid although they were not affected by the disasters.

“Residents affected need to ensure they have filled in all their particulars and have made a police report on the tragedy. If all requirements were met, the aid will be distributed within seven days."

Speaking on disaster mitigation measures, she said the state government has its own working group to asses short- and long-term mitigation plans.

“We also have a Smart Disaster Management move under the Smart Selangor initiative.

“Besides that, the Smart Selangor Command Centre that enables a more comprehensive, efficient and swift disaster monitoring in relevant areas. It includes weather, sea-level, air pollution index, flood, satellite and climate radar monitoring.

“Monitoring activities will also be carried out via the Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) at high risk areas. The state is also working with the Selangor and Federal Territories Minerals and Geoscience Department, where they have identified critical hillslopes in Selangor.”

It was reported that there are 20 critical hillslopes in Selangor (Kajang, Ampang Jaya, Selayang and part of Hulu Selangor), which have been identified to be at risk of a landslide if no action is taken to properly maintain the sites. Flash floods hit some parts of Klang and Shah Alam yesterday in an early morning downpour, which left several locations here inundated by one-metre deep water, resulting in impassable roads and stranded motorists.

Among the affected areas were Bandar Bukit Raja, Taman Rasah and Padang Jawa.