Our long suffering nurses deserve better
June 15, 2022 @ 12:10am
After the pandemic hit in 2020, the country went into a crisis, and hospitals, clinics and nursing homes were looking for more nurses. - NSTP file pic
After the pandemic hit in 2020, the country went into a crisis, and hospitals, clinics and nursing homes were looking for more nurses. - NSTP file pic

LETTERS: As a nursing leader of almost five decades, I have seen many ups and downs regarding nursing staff. The issues of staff shortage and exhaustion are global in nature.

Let's look at the most common situation, which has worsened the nursing crisis.

After the pandemic hit in 2020, the country went into a crisis, and hospitals, clinics and nursing homes were looking for more nurses.

So, as a quick solution, most of the industry's Human Resources Departments, management and policymakers opted for contract nurses, who were available as part-timers.

MORE NEWS
Pandemic-weary Australian nurses go on strike
Nurses are overworked, underpaid and unappreciated
Health Ministry to consider employing trained nurses from abroad
#Showbiz: Maria Tunku Sabri suffers from long-term effects of Covid-19
But now that the pandemic has passed and the workload has eased a little, many part-time nurses were terminated due to the "higher management's decision".


As a result, what could have been a solution to a deeply-rooted problem, has worsened the nursing shortage crisis.


Ignoring experienced nurses in exchange for young and inexperienced ones who can work long tiring shifts is another matter.

This has caused nurses to overwork, and exhausted and inexperienced nurses slowly contributed to the decline in quality healthcare.

The salary payment structure didn't do much justice either. Not much recognition is given to nurses with over 10 years of experience and even those with one or two years of experience.

In terms of extra allowance, only RM100 monthly and yearly increment are given to those in the government sector, regardless of qualifications.

As a result, they see no clear career path ahead and no career growth, hence many have decided to choose early retirement, venture into businesses, go abroad or switch to other occupations.

Another issue is people are now looking for nurses with degrees.

Possessing a nursing degree is now a recruitment requirement for the healthcare industry.

In Malaysia, we have different degree programmes and for a diploma holder to get a degree is difficult and time-consuming.

As a result, the number of degree holders is not as high as we want.

As such, slowly but surely, our nursing standards are declining. Without competent nursing professionals, our healthcare industry is going to suffer even more in the near future.

We need policymakers to walk their talk, as mentioned by the health minister during the International Nurses Day celebration in Putrajaya on May 12.

PROFESSOR ZAHRAH SAAD

International Relations Director, Founder and Former Dean of Nursing and Midwifery Faculty, MAHSA university