Gloomy glove price if demand-supply mismatch not resolved, says Top Glove

KUALA LUMPUR: Top Glove Corporation Bhd believes that the average selling price (ASP) for rubber gloves will drop below the pre-pandemic level in 2019 if the issue of imbalance in demand and supply is not addressed accordingly.

Top Glove chairman Tan Sri Dr Lim Wee Chai said while this had affected the group's margin, which almost bottoming down, it remained steadfast in its prospects moving forward on the back of its strong fundamentals.

"Due to the deteriorating ASP over the past few months, the group's margin is very close to the bottom, with only a few per cent. 

"Whether this (margin) will bottom or not, will depend on the supply and demand situation in the next few months.

"At this level, based on the announcement earlier from other companies, some of which are ceasing operations - this already negates a negative position as well.

"But this will help to balance the demand and supply situation moving forward. We should see an improvement in margin going forward," Lim told reporters and analysts during Top Glove's virtual third quarter (Q3) results briefing today.

In Q3, Top Glove said ASPs were declining at a far slower pace which would help cushion the cost impact going forward. 

Top Glove said for Q3, the average natural latex concentrate price has risen 17 per cent quarter-on-quarter to RM6.50 per kg.

The average nitrile latex price was US$1.11 per kg, three per cent lower compared to Q2 FY22.

In consideration of the moderating demand, the group has deferred and reduced its major capital expenditure (capex) for the immediate term, as it continues to align its expansion plans with market conditions.

Executive director Lim Cheong Guan said the group had budgeted RM500 million in capex for FY23.

"Our key area focus for FY23 is our in house upstream supply such as nitrile raw latex and gamma sterilisation plant where we have ready customers," he said.

Top Glove's net profit plunged 99.2 per cent to RM15.29 million in Q3 ended May 31, 2022, from the RM2.04 billion recorded in the same quarter a year ago.

Its revenue for the quarter shrank 64.8 per cent to RM1.46 billion from RM4.16 billion.

In a statement today, the glove manufacturer said the softer performance came amid a convergence of headwinds, with production costs moving upward due to global inflation and as the Russia-Ukraine conflict drove up crude oil prices.

Additionally, the group contended with increases in natural gas and electricity tariffs, as well as minimum wage implementation which came into effect from May 1, 2022. 

For the nine-month period, Top Glove's net profit decreased 96 per cent to RM288.56 million from RM7.26 billion, while revenue decreased 68.5 per cent to RM4.49 billion from RM14.29 billion.

Managing director Datuk Lee Kim Meow said Top Glove believed that the outlook for the glove industry was still promising as gloves remained an essential item in the healthcare sector. 

"We are very confident that demand will keep growing with increased usage from emerging markets where the glove consumption base is relatively low, coupled with higher levels of hygiene and health consciousness in a post-pandemic era," he said.