Cautious outlook on trade growth

KUALA LUMPUR: Malaysia's external trade numbers continue to surprise on the upside in March, driven by the jump in mining exports on top of stronger electrical and electronics (E&E) shipments, analysts said.

They, however, are cautious about the outlook in the coming months due to external developments.

MIDF Research said the strong March numbers showed Malaysia, as a commodity-exporting country, stood to benefit from the higher commodity prices.

The firm, however, is still cautious on the outlook going forward given the extended lockdown and slowdown in China and ongoing Russia's military action in Ukraine.

"The near-term outlook for production and trade can be constrained by prolonged disruption in the global supply chain and increased inflationary pressures. Nevertheless, we opine the continued expansion in global demand for E&E and commodities will support overall exports outlook.

"Moreover, the reopening of economies will facilitate growing trade activity this year," it said.

MIDF Research kept Malaysia's exports and imports growth at 7.8 per cent and 9.6 per cent respectively for 2022.

Malaysia's total trade grew faster than expected at 27.3 per cent year-on-year (Y-o-Y) to new monthly high of RM236.6 billion in March.

The increase was driven by stronger growth in both exports and imports.

Exports growth jumped to 25.4 per cent Y-o-Y (February: 16.8 per cent Y-o-Y), above MIDF Research and market's expectations, backed by demand for E&E and commodities, particularly liquefied natural gas, crude and refined petroleum, and palm oil and palm oil products.

Imports growth was even faster at 29.9 per cent Y-o-Y (February: 18.4 per cent Y-o-Y), also higher than expected.

"Sustained double-digit growth in imports for the 14th straight month reflects higher purchases of foreign goods in line with expanding domestic economic activities after the economic reopening," MIDF Research said.

Meanwhile, Kenanga Research expects Malaysia's trade activity to moderate in the coming months as the base effect dissipates and trade activity normalises.

The trade growth will also be capped by the Russia- Ukraine crisis, Covid-19 development, and China's zero-Covid policy, subsequently impacting the global supply chain and demand.

Nonetheless, the firm said adverse effects were expected to be limited given Malaysia's export diversification and robust demand from key trading partners.

"Therefore, we maintain the first quarter 2022 gross development product growth at 5.7 per cent, bringing the overall 2022 growth at 5.0 to 5.5 per cent," Kenanga Research said.