Title: Ronny Mauricio’s homer caps impressive night in final plea as Mets roster crunch looms

Ronny Mauricio hasn’t been focused on the looming roster crunch. Or that Mark Vientos will return from his strained hamstring soon and Mauricio — after a three-week stretch with the Mets — could be back in the minors.

But one night before the Mets might need to make that decision, with Vientos expected back in the lineup as early as Thursday and almost certainly by Friday, Mauricio delivered a final plea for the Mets to keep him in the majors.

He blasted his third homer of the season and collected the first three-hit game of his career during the 7-3 win over the Braves at Citi Field, continuing to flash the potential that has made him a top prospect while lifting his average to .224 after it dipped to .171 last week.

“Obviously, the results aren’t always gonna favor you,” Mauricio told The Post through an interpreter, “but I think the biggest thing is to focus in on what your plan is — and eventually, hopefully the results will come to fruition.”

Earlier this week, president of baseball operations David Stearns acknowledged the Mets are “asking a lot” of Mauricio.

A torn ACL forced him to miss all of 2024, and he only collected limited at-bats in the minors this year. But the potential of Mauricio — his strengths — were evident, Stearns said. The ability to hit the ball hard. The ability to keep playing multiple positions.

Mauricio displayed all of that again Wednesday when he played second base for a second consecutive game after logging three starts at third last week against the Braves.

In the third inning, he redirected a pitch from Didier Fuentes 378 feet over the right field fence before singling as part of the Mets’ five-run fourth and adding another base hit — with an exit velocity of 111.1 mph — in the eighth. Mauricio was “under control” and balanced on the home run swing, manager Carlos Mendoza said, and he used the entire field for his hits.

“I haven’t been around him much,” Mendoza said, “but just watching how he’s dealing with some adversity here at the big league level, especially after what he went through last year, it’s not easy to do.”

Still, it might be too late for Mauricio. His mixed results might be too shaky to warrant a roster spot after Vientos — out since exiting their June 2 game — returns.

That, logistically, means Mauricio or Baty could get sent to Syracuse, especially with infielder Luisangel Acuña and catcher Francisco Alvarez already optioned this week.

But if Wednesday was it for this stint, Mauricio gave the Mets one more reminder of what he can provide.

“What I am focused on is hopefully Mark comes back healthy and he can help the team out in any way possible,” Mauricio said. “And if the roster decision needs to be made, then it’ll be made. But I’m here to do whatever the team wants me to do.”