Title: Jazz Chisholm blasts homer as bat does talking this time to help Yankees roll by Reds

CINCINNATI — Jazz Chisholm Jr. was seeing red Tuesday night, which Jose Trevino had something to do with.

By Wednesday, the only red in Chisholm’s sight was the color of the right field seats where his moonshot of a two-run homer was landing. And of course, his trip around the bases brought him right past Trevino, where the Yankees third baseman got the last laugh with his former teammate.

A night after getting ejected in the ninth inning by the home plate umpire who was tipped off by Trevino, Chisholm let his bat do the talking, his two-run shot keying a 7-1 win over the Reds to avoid a sweep at Great American Ballpark.

“I did tell [Trevino] it was for last night,” Chisholm said with a grin. “He was the one who kind of provoked the umpire and stuff. So for that all to happen, I just told him it was for last night.”

Max Fried was terrific again, tossing seven innings of one-run (unearnned) ball while helping the Yankees (46-34) win for the fourth time in their past 13 games and maintain a one-game lead over the Rays atop the AL East.

Chisholm was not available for the final two and a half innings of Tuesday’s 11-inning loss after getting ejected in the ninth.

He had been upset about a called strike against him in the top of the ninth and then was still talking to (he claimed) himself at third base while taking grounders when he looked up and saw home plate umpire Mark Wegner staring at him.

Chisholm asked Wegner why he was looking at him, which was apparently enough to get him tossed.

As it turned out, Trevino, who had come out on deck for the bottom of the ninth, was the one who alerted Wegner that Chisholm was trying to get his attention.

When Chisholm came into the clubhouse Wednesday, someone showed him the video of that happening, which he got a good chuckle out of.

“That’s his game. We know Trevy,” Chisholm said. “I thought it was pretty funny.”

Chisholm was not upset about it, but the banter continued during Wednesday’s game.

“As soon as I came up in my first at-bat, the first thing he said was, ‘Don’t forget, they need you on the field,’ ” Chisholm said. “I was like, ‘So you’re smart to get me off the field.’ Just being buddies and playing with each other before, knowing it wasn’t really out of spite.”

So when Chisholm clobbered his 11th homer of the season that put the Yankees up 3-0 in the third inning, he flipped his bat and took a nice trot around the bases, then told Trevino it was for Tuesday night’s events, with both appearing to laugh it off.

Before Chisholm went deep, through the first two innings, the Yankees’ mistakes from the last two nights — nearly the last two weeks, really — looked to be haunting them again.

They had put six runners on base, only one of which came in to score — on Trent Grisham’s RBI single — while going 1-for-8 with two walks and six strikeouts with runners in scoring position.

The Yankees finished the night 4-for-22 with runners in scoring position — making it 5-for-43 in the three-game series — but this time they did enough to salvage the win.

Jasson Domínguez and Grisham led the way with four hits and two doubles apiece.

Aaron Judge also added some insurance with an RBI double in the sixth inning that made it 5-1 as the Yankees wrapped up a tiring 16-day, 16-game stretch on a high note.

“I think everybody’s going to sleep 14 hours [Thursday],” said Chisholm, whose throwing error in the fourth inning allowed the Reds’ only run of the night to score off Fried.

But they could sleep a little easier coming off a win, with Chisholm’s vindictive 433-foot blast providing the spark that sent them on their way.

“That’s big-time power right there,” manager Aaron Boone said. “That was [a release]. We got the early lead, which was nice, but then to extend it right away was really nice.”