Title: Why Yankees are unwilling to use Devin Williams for two-inning saves

CINCINNATI — There may come a time when the Yankees are willing to use Devin Williams for more than three outs.

But that time has not yet arrived.

That much was evident on Tuesday, when Williams threw a nine-pitch ninth inning and then did not come back out for the 10th on a night when the Yankees bullpen was stretched thin in a 5-4, 11-inning loss to the Reds.

“Look, he’s here as kind of a one-inning guy and that’s what he’s done the last couple years,” Boone said Wednesday before a 7-1 series-ending victory over the Reds. “I think there’s going to be a time when there’s a four-out scenario, but I’m not prepared right now to send him out there for a two-inning outing.”


Williams, a pending free agent, said he was not asked to go more than one inning on Tuesday and indicated it was Boone’s decision.

“I feel like the bullpen works better when guys are going one inning,” said Williams, who did not pitch in Wednesday’s win.

The last time Williams, who missed over half of last season with a stress fracture in his back, was asked to record more than three outs was September 2023.

Between 2021-23, only seven of his 184 regular-season outings lasted more than one inning, and none of those were for more than five outs.

Late in the 2020 season, Williams threw three straight two-inning outings in a single week and ended up getting hurt with a shoulder issue that forced him to be left off the wild-card series roster.

“It definitely keeps guys healthier [going one inning], I think,” he said.

In relief of Williams, Mark Leiter Jr. (after throwing 27 pitches Monday) threw the 10th and 11th innings before the Reds walked off with the win.

The Yankees have not yet decided whether Marcus Stroman (knee) will make his next start with them or pitch another rehab outing.

The veteran got tagged for 10 hits and five runs in 3 ²/₃ innings Tuesday at Double-A Somerset while building his pitch count up to 65.

“Obviously got roughed up a little bit in the outing and the line wasn’t great,” Boone said. “But we’ll dig into it some more and see what the best next move is.”

J.C. Escarra was initially in the lineup Wednesday, but that changed when his wife went into labor a few hours before first pitch.

So Escarra left the stadium shortly before 5 p.m. to fly back home to be with his wife for the birth of their first child.

Jonathan Loáisiga also left the stadium early on Wednesday afternoon, wearing a mask, with an undisclosed illness.

Boone said it was not something that would require an IL stint.

The Yankees are using Thursday’s off-day to flip Clarke Schmidt and Will Warren in the rotation this weekend.

Schmidt will be pitching on his seventh day after his recovery between his past two starts — the most recent one being seven no-hit innings on Saturday — has gone slower.

