Title: Free-falling Mets find new way to disappoint in ugly loss to Braves

Normally, the Mets wait until later in the year to have the Braves derail their season. 

But Atlanta continued to do a number on its free-falling rivals Tuesday, as the Mets blew a three-run lead and lost 7-4. 

It was their 10th defeat in their past 11 games, this one in especially ugly fashion on a sweltering night at Citi Field. 

“There’s definitely some frustration,’’ Francisco Lindor said of the team’s mentality. “We don’t want to lose. I do feel a sense of urgency from the guys. It’s all about winning and we’re not doing that right now.” 

When a team is playing as poorly as the Mets are these days, it tends to find new ways to disappoint — and this game was no different. 

The Mets got five scoreless innings from Frankie Montas in his debut with the club after missing the first three months of the season with a strained lat. 

And an offense that’s been slumping finally got a big two-out hit, as Brett Baty delivered a two-run single in the fourth that helped give them a 3-0 lead. 

That hit was their second of the night — and last until the ninth inning. The Mets have scored just 14 runs in their past eight losses. 

A ninth-inning rally fell short, as Lindor grounded out to end it, stranding a pair of base runners. 

“We’re not happy with the results,’’ Mets manager Carlos Mendoza said. “We’re going through it right now. We’ve got to pay attention to details. We’ll get there.’’ 

Several players said that if they did have to deal with a dismal stretch like this one, they’d rather do it now than later in the season, but there are no easy fixes to ensure it doesn’t continue. 

The bullpen, which entered having allowed the second-most base runners in the majors this month — only the Twins have been worse, according to FanGraphs — was knocked around again. 

It didn’t take long, either. 

Montas exited after 80 pitches and was replaced by Huascar Brazobán, who walked the first three batters he faced and then allowed a sacrifice fly to Ozzie Albies to cut the Mets lead to 3-1 — and the Braves were just getting started. 

José Castillo replaced Brazobán and didn’t retire any of the three batters he faced. 

He allowed a run-scoring single to pinch hitter Eli White and a game-tying hit to Nick Allen before Reed Garrett came on and struck out Ronald Acuña Jr. 

The normally reliable Garrett joined the club and gave up a base hit to Matt Olson to put the Braves up by a pair. 

Atlanta added two more runs in the eighth to help put the game away, as the pen wasted Montas’ strong effort. 

The right-hander was unimpressive in all six of his minor league rehab outings, but insisted he would be ready when the lights came on Tuesday — and he was. 

Montas allowed three hits and three walks, putting the Mets in position to get a much-needed win. 

They went up in the fourth by loading the bases and getting a sacrifice fly from Jeff McNeil before Baty’s two-run single made it 3-0. 

The threat in the ninth fell short after Ronny Mauricio doubled in a run to make it 7-4, but Lindor couldn’t extend it. 

At this point, the lone hopeful sign for the Mets is that they only have two more games in this series against the Braves, who they haven’t beaten in five tries this season, before they visit the woebegone Pirates in Pittsburgh on Friday. 

“We have to stay together,” Lindor said. “We have to fight for each other and find a way. … We’re still in the mix. We’re one week away from looking completely different. I believe in what we have here.”